Add draft of runtime async ECMA-335 changes (#104063)
dotnet/runtime: docs/design/specs/runtime-async.md

This document is a draft of changes to ECMA-335 for the "runtime async" feature. When the feature is officially supported, it can be merged into the final ECMA-335 augments document.

# Runtime-async

Async is currently a feature implemented by various .NET languages as a compiler rewrite to support methods that can "yield" control back to their caller at specific "suspension" points. While effective, it's believed that implementation directly in the .NET runtime can provide improvements, especially in performance.

## Spec modifications

These are proposed modifications to the ECMA-335 specification for runtime-async.

### I.8.4.5 Sync and Async Methods

> Methods may be either 'sync' or 'async'. Async method definitions are methods with a return type of `System.Threading.Task`, `System.Threading.ValueTask`, `System.Threading.Task<T>`, or `System.Threading.ValueTask<T>`  attributed with `[RuntimeAsyncMethodAttribute]`. Inside async method bodies, async methods are also invokable by a special signature encoding, described in [### I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures].

Reviewer: We should explicitly spell out the shape of `RuntimeAsyncMethodAttribute` in this proposal, including containing namespace and constructors. Also, do we intend to define that attribute in the same assembly as `System.Object`? If so, we can use its presence to drive compiler behavior around the new form; the alternative is to use a `RuntimeFlags` flag, as we've done in the past with other new runtime features. We could also just always use `RuntimeFlags` to drive it, but we do need to specify whether the runtime will honor _any_ `RuntimeAsyncMethodAttribute`, or just the one it defines.

Reviewer: I also think we should put `CompilerFeatureRequiredAttribute` on the `RuntimeAsyncMethodAttribute` type, so that compilers who don't understand the feature block its use. We probably don't want users slapping this on their own methods.

Author: Included the namespace name and mention of the assembly requirements. Didn't spell out the constructor requirements, but the example usage shows the empty constructor.

We could add stuff like AttributeUsage and CompilerFeatureRequiredAttribute, but they don't have any actual impact on ECMA so it's debatable whether this is the right place, or if that should live in a compiler spec.

Sync methods are all other methods.

Unlike sync methods, async methods support suspension. Suspension allows async methods to yield control flow back to their caller at certain well-defined suspension points, and resume execution of the remaining method at a later time or location, potentially on another thread.

Async methods also do not have matching return type conventions as sync methods. For sync methods, the stack should contain a value convertible to the stated return type before the `ret` instruction. For async methods, the stack should be empty in the case of `Task` or `ValueTask`, or the type argument in the case of `Task<T>` or `ValueTask<T>`.

> Async methods support the following suspension points:

Reviewer: What about awaiting locals of type Task/ValueTask?

Reviewer: Note for future readers of this comment: this is the second suspension point below.

* Calling another async method. No special instructions need to be provided. If the callee suspends, the caller will suspend as well.
* Using new .NET runtime APIs to "await" an "INotifyCompletion" type. The signatures of these methods shall be:
  ```C#
  // public static async2 Task AwaitAwaiterFromRuntimeAsync<TAwaiter>(TAwaiter awaiter) where TAwaiter : INotifyCompletion

>   public static void modreq([System.Runtime]System.Threading.Tasks.Task) AwaitAwaiterFromRuntimeAsync<TAwaiter>(TAwaiter awaiter) where TAwaiter : INotifyCompletion

Reviewer: What type contains these methods?

Author: Fixed

All async methods effectively have two entry points, or signatures. The first signature is the one present in the above code: a `Task` or `ValueTask` returning method. The second signature is a "secondary signature", described in further detail in [I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures].

Callers may retrieve a Task-equivalent return type from an async method via calling the "Task-equivalent signature". This functionality is available in both sync and async methods.

### I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures

The list of relevant components is augmented to include sync vs. async method types. Async methods have some additions to normal signature compatibility.

Async methods are capable of calling certain methods using an "async signature." The target method must return one of `Task`, `ValueTask`, `Task<T>`, or `ValueTask<T>`.

The async signature is generated based on the primary signature. The transformation is as follows:
* If the target method return type is `Task` or `ValueTask`, the return type of the secondary signature is `void` with the first custom modifier on the return type being the original type.

> * Otherwise, the return type is the type argument of the return type (either ``Task`1`` or ``ValueTask`1``) with the first custom modifier on the return type being the original type.

Reviewer: > with the first custom modifier on the return type being the original type

Consider generic methods such as the invoke method of `Func<Task>`:
```il
instance !0 class [System.Runtime]System.Func`1<class [System.Runtime]System.Threading.Tasks.Task>::Invoke()
```

Which of these would the runtime async signature be?

```il
// Use the type argument
instance modreq(!0) void class [System.Runtime]System.Func`1<class [System.Runtime]System.Threading.Tasks.Task>::Invoke()
```

```il
// Use Task directly
instance modreq([System.Runtime]System.ThreadingTasks.Task) void class [System.Runtime]System.Func`1<class [System.Runtime]System.Threading.Tasks.Task>::Invoke()
```

Reviewer 2: One rule that we had in the prototype is that methods do not become async via generic substitution. 

Basically given `T Foo<T>()`, the only thing you can get from `Foo<Task>()` is to call it and get a `Task` result. You can't call it via modreq'd signature. 

Most likely we should keep the rule. Would it make this case resolved?

Reviewer: > Would it make this case resolved?

It would, but I'm concerned about knock-on effects. Would we start seeing users defining `AsyncFunc` delegate types to avoid intermediate `Task` allocations and recover perf?

Reviewer: In particular, `ASP.NET` is going to use a lot of `Task`-returning `Func`s. Are they in a performance pit because of this?

Author: See https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/109632

# Runtime-async

Async is currently a feature implemented by various .NET languages as a compiler rewrite to support methods that can "yield" control back to their caller at specific "suspension" points. While effective, it's believed that implementation directly in the .NET runtime can provide improvements, especially in performance.

## Spec modifications

These are proposed modifications to the ECMA-335 specification for runtime-async.

### I.8.4.5 Sync and Async Methods

Methods may be either 'sync' or 'async'. Async methods have a special signature encoding, described in [### I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures].

Sync methods are all other methods.

Unlike sync methods, async methods support suspension. Suspension allows async methods to yield control flow back to their caller at certain well-defined suspension points, and resume execution of the remaining method at a later time or location, potentially on another thread.

Async methods support the following suspension points:

* Calling another async method. No special instructions need to be provided. If the callee suspends, the caller will suspend as well.

> * Using a library in the .NET corelib to "await" an "INotifyCompletion" type. The signatures of these methods shall be:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Using new .NET runtime APIs to "await" an "INotifyCompletion" type. The signatures of these methods shall be:
```
Also, we may want to put these APIs into a type that they will be exposed from. (The exact names of the type and methods are subject to API review.)

  ```C#
  // public static async2 Task AwaitAwaiterFromRuntimeAsync<TAwaiter>(TAwaiter awaiter) where TAwaiter : INotifyCompletion
  public static void modopt([System.Runtime]System.Threading.Tasks.Task) AwaitAwaiterFromRuntimeAsync<TAwaiter>(TAwaiter awaiter) where TAwaiter : INotifyCompletion
  // public static async2 Task UnsafeAwaitAwaiterFromRuntimeAsync<TAwaiter>(TAwaiter awaiter) where TAwaiter : ICriticalNotifyCompletion
  public static void modopt([System.Runtime]System.Threading.Tasks.Task) UnsafeAwaitAwaiterFromRuntimeAsync<TAwaiter>(TAwaiter awaiter) where TAwaiter : ICriticalNotifyCompletion
  ```

Each of the above methods will have semantics analogous to the current AsyncTaskMethodBuilder.AwaitOnCompleted/AwaitUnsafeOnCompleted methods. After calling this method, in can be presumed that the task has completed.

> Async methods have the following restrictions:

Reviewer 3: We should split these restrictions into fundamental (hard/impossible to ever remove them) and non-fundamental ones that just exist to make the initial implementation easier.

Author: Are there any truly fundamental restrictions? I think, with enough effort, we could make almost anything work.

Reviewer 3: I think escaping ref and byref locals are fundamental restriction category. I agree that we can make them work in principle, but it would come with tough performance trade-offs.

> Async methods have the following restrictions:

Reviewer 3: What about byref-like types? We should make sure that the rules work for https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/ref-unsafe-in-iterators-async.md

Author: Given this restriction is only going to be lifted in .NET 9, I think it would be OK to leave this support out of v1.

Reviewer 3: What is Roslyn going to do when it runs into this and targeting runtime that supports async v2? Is it going to silently fallback to async v1? It does not sound right to me.

I think the support for this may be actually a good justification for introducing annotations of non-escaping / escaping locals: Non-escaping locals work just like locals today. Escaping locals cannot by ref or byref like types, taking their address is ref and not an unmanaged pointer, etc.

Reviewer 4: > I think the support for this may be actually a good justification for introducing annotations of non-escaping / escaping locals: Non-escaping locals work just like locals today. Escaping locals cannot be ref or byref like types, taking their address is a byref and not an unmanaged pointer, etc.

I am not sure there is a good reason for us to have these annotations unless/until we also decide to support byrefs that are live across suspension. If live byrefs are not allowed then liveness analysis can treat any address exposed local to no longer have escaped at any suspension point and only save it if there are actual visible uses/defs after the suspension point (which may include taking the address again).

I think the support for https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/ref-unsafe-in-iterators-async.md comes down to how we reword the "Transient pointers" section to describe the address of locals. I pointed at it here: https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/104063#discussion_r1656968365

Reviewer 3: > I am not sure there is a good reason for us to have these annotations unless/until we also decide to support byrefs that are live across suspension

To make it possible to compute types on IL stack without the full liveness analysis and to avoid changing the type of ldarga from unmanaged pointer to managed pointer for locals that are never live across transitions. I agree that these annotations are not strictly required to make the system work.

> support byrefs that are live across suspension.

If we took a bet on liveness analysis, I think that this can be done by the liveness analysis too.

Reviewer 4: > To make it possible to compute types on IL stack without the full liveness analysis and to avoid changing the type of ldarga from unmanaged pointer to managed pointer for locals that are never live across transitions.

Do you mean spec wise or implementation wise? Spec wise these are all managed pointers already, and I don't see a good reason to change that. I think we should just document that they reside in unmanaged memory that can be used without pinning, but that their address may move across suspension points. Then it comes down to the fact that we do not preserve values with byrefs/structs with byrefs across suspension points.

Implementation wise I don't think there will be a difference for these locals in the JIT, async or not. The liveness analysis is only about computing the state to capture at each suspension point.

> If we took a bet on liveness analysis, I think that this can be done by the liveness analysis too.

When byrefs are allowed to be live across suspension points Roslyn can do a better job than the JIT can, because it has a richer model about what may escape. My example from the internal document: if the JIT sees a call to an instance method on a struct, then it is going to consider that struct to be exposed.
If there is also a byref live across a suspension point, then that byref may point to the exposed struct. In effect the JIT needs to consider both the exposed struct and byref to be live across the suspension point.

On the other hand Roslyn only needs to consider the instance as escaping if it also has `[UnscopedRef]` on it; otherwise it knows that the address of the instance was not actually taken once the method call returns. So it can annotate that the struct local is not actually the target of any byrefs across suspension points.

I _think_ when byrefs are not allowed across suspension points the code generators can do a job that in practice is as good as Roslyn, via the liveness analysis. Then it comes down to whether we want to have a conservatively larger liveness set in tier0/MinOpts, or whether we can pay for the liveness analysis even during tier0/MinOpts. I think we can -- in my experience these kind of throughput questions usually come down to engineering within the JIT.

Author: I was initially leaving "unhoisted ref-locals" out of the spec to keep the implementation simpler. But it sounds like the implementors are fine with the additional work. So I'll put it in. :smile:

Reviewer 5: > these annotations are not strictly required to make the system work

We would really really like to have the annotations for the tier0 interpreter.  We would like to avoid:
1. having to do our own analysis in tier0 to determine which locals need to be preserved in the closure. That will slow down startup.
2. having tier0 and optimized versions of an async2 function use different closure representations (for example tier0 that conservatively saves everything and optimized code that only saves a subset)

Author: I've also put in the statement about marking hoisted variables.

Reviewer 3: > Do you mean spec wise or implementation wise? Spec wise these are all managed pointers already, and I don't see a good reason to change that. 

They are managed pointers with extra promise about being implicitly pinned. My primary concern was about ensuring that there are no subtle mismatches in how different parts of the system interpret liveness. Let's consider this hypothetical example:

```
void M()
{
    
    {
       int x;
       foo(&x);
    }

    await SomeAsyncMethod();

    {
       int x;
       foo(&x);
    }
}
```

This should get compiled into IL with two local variables, so far so good. Now, some optimization pass observes that there are two `x` variables with same type and disjoint lifetimes and decides to merge them into one. Oops, it just introduced a subtle GC hole. The merged variable liveness is crossing suspension point and the address is no longer pinned.

> whether we can pay for the liveness analysis even during tier0/MinOpts. I think we can -- in my experience these kind of throughput questions usually come down to engineering within the JIT

I agree that cost of the analysis should not be our primary motivation for introducing these annotations. It should not be prohibitively expensive to do the liveness analysis even in tier 0 or interpreter.

> "unhoisted ref-locals" out of the spec to keep the implementation simpler

I do not think allowing byrefs across suspension points should be part of the initial design. The initial design should be oriented around performance and compatibility. Support for byrefs crossing suspension points is not that.

Reviewer 4: > The merged variable liveness is crossing suspension point and the address is no longer pinned.

This is further motivation to me that we should specify that locals live in static memory in-between suspension points, but that they may move across suspension points. I do not see a problem with your example case under this specification.

> I was initially leaving "unhoisted ref-locals" out of the spec to keep the implementation simpler. But it sounds like the implementors are fine with the additional work. So I'll put it in. 😄

I would prefer the opposite: no annotations and it should be left up to the code generator to compute a sufficient live set to allow for resumption with the right semantics. When optimizing the code generators (at least RyuJIT) will create their own internal locals that is going to require this analysis anyway.

The current spec seems a bit odd to me; requiring non-marked locals to be reinitialized on resumption has strange implications. For example, what is the semantics of a program `x = 5; await Foo(); Use(x)` where `x` is unmarked when `Foo` did not suspend? Is `x = 5` or `x = 0`?

> having tier0 and optimized versions of an async2 function use different closure representations (for example tier0 that conservatively saves everything and optimized code that only saves a subset)

@lambdageek Does this mean that you expect Mono to create no internal locals that are live across suspension points, even when optimizing? I do not see this as a possible strategy for RyuJIT when we want performance close to "normal" straight-line code in the synchronous cases.

Reviewer 3: > This is further motivation to me that we should specify that locals live in static memory in-between suspension points, but that they may move across suspension points. I do not see a problem with your example case under this specification.

How would this specification be implemented in practice? I can think of: Keep the address taken locals on the stack and copy their values between the stack and the state machine as necessary (that is fine with me); or pin the state machine (this sounds problematic at scale).

Reviewer 4: > How would this specification be implemented in practice? I can think of: Keep the address taken locals on the stack and copy their values between the stack and the state machine as necessary (that is fine with me); or pin the state machine (this sounds problematic at scale).

In the JIT state machine prototype we indeed do the former. On resumption the live set is copied from the continuation back to registers/the stack frame, and control resumes in the same code that was running before suspension.

I believe the unwinder-based prototype does similar copying for 'tasklets' before they are executed, but I could be wrong about that.

Reviewer 4: > I expect that when the interpreter needs to create locals for its own use we will know from context whether we expect the local to live across suspension points (or at least we will conservatively know which locals definitely don't need to live across suspension points).

What I mean is that it is almost inevitable that optimized code has a different closure representation than the unoptimized code, at least if you are optimizing the code as if it was normal synchronous code. Things like inlining, constant propagation, copy propagation etc. are going to result in less live state across suspension points while things like CSE, promotion, hoisting are going to result in more live state across the suspension points. Trying to match the closure between the unoptimized and optimized versions feels like a non-starter to me.

Reviewer 6: @lambdageek With interpreter, tiering up during method execution can only happen at certain patchpoint locations where the IL stack is empty. The method execution state is thus fully identified by the values of IL args and locals. For optimized code, after a patchpoint, we insert some IR markers for IL vars that are live at that point, that behave as a redefinition for those vars. This forces following uses of the var to obtain the value from the IL locals space, in case the var value comes from code executed in tier0. We don't do any copying of the state when tiering up, the optimized code just works naturally with the values in the IL locals/args. Stackalloc memory is allocated separately from the interp stack where the IL args/locals live.

Author: I am going to keep the annotations for now. It's easier to plan for them and not need them then the reverse.

> * Usage of the `localloc` and instruction is forbidden

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Usage of the `localloc` instruction is forbidden
```

> * The `lodloca` and `ldarga` instructions are redefined to return managed pointers instead of pointers.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* The `ldloca` and `ldarga` instructions are redefined to return managed pointers instead of pointers.
```

> * The `lodloca` and `ldarga` instructions are redefined to return managed pointers instead of pointers.

Reviewer 4: Note that `ldloca` and `ldarga` already return managed pointers in the spec. This should rather be a modification around the note we have on transient pointers here: https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/design/specs/Ecma-335-Augments.md#transient-pointers

There is a question of what level of behavior we want to specify. We can either specify
> Arguments / local variables of async methods are stored in unmanaged memory with an address that is guaranteed to be static in between suspension points, but that may change across suspension points.

or

> Arguments / local variables of async methods are stored in managed memory.

The latter precludes code like `unsafe { <unsafe code taking addresses of locals without any suspension points> }` in C#, but Roslyn already warns on that today.

I think in either case we also need to document that values of managed pointers and structs containing managed pointers are not preserved across suspension points (at least for an initial version).

Author: I picked the last one because it's the most restrictive. We can relax it if necessary.

* Pinning locals may not be created

> * The `tail` prefix is forbidden

Reviewer 8: https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/discussions/8031#discussioncomment-9000799

F# requires tail call support. Is there any plan to supported it afterwards, if not in initial release?

Reviewer 9: Yes, this will be crucial for us, and we also want to support it on release.

Reviewer 4: I think some further work is required from my side before it is possible to answer this question, in particular around what kind of constraints the compatibility handling is going to put on the semantics of async2 methods.
For example, if compatibility ends up requiring us to have a side-effecting epilog in all async2 methods then that makes tailcall support hard/impossible.

If we ignore potential compatibility concerns and use a model close to what exists in the current prototype, then I do not see a significant barrier to allowing `tail.` (famous last words). We may just need an async2 aware version of the tailcall dispatcher that knows about the potential of either suspension or a follow-up call.

It might be that F# is just going to opt out of all the compatibility scaffolding, in which case maybe this will be simple work (and the final documentation of the feature should just document how `tail.` interacts with the different compatibility switches).

@vzarytovskii if you have existing concrete `async` cases where forms of tailcalls are required for correctness it would be very helpful for me to look at how we translate those into the async2 model.

Author: It is expected that there are a number of existing C# scenarios that will not be possible in `runtime async` and the old codegen will need to be preserved for those cases. "Async iterators" is one such example. I think `tail.` is another. The F# compiler would be expected to use it's old codegen for cases that are not initially supported.

We may expand the scope later, but that's not part of this document.

Reviewer 10: I was wondering about async-iterators too. They could still take advantage of async2, but that would require new codegen from roslyn (ie. generate an `async2 MoveNextAsync`)

> Suspension points may not appear in exception handling blocks.

Reviewer 8: Since C# supports `await` in `catch` and `finally`, how would the gap be resolved? Would the compiler be required to transform it?

> All async methods effectively have two entry points, or signatures. The first signature is the one present in the above code: a modopt before the return type. The second signature is a "Task-equivalent signature", described in further detail in [I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures].

Reviewer 5: Won't `modopt` make the signatures look like sync methods to unaware tools?  Which means they could potentially create invalid IL by calling them like ordinary sync methods.

Async methods have a special calling convention and may not be called directly outside of other async methods. To call an async method from a sync method, callers must use the second "Task-equivalent signature".

Callers may retrieve a Task-equivalent return type from an async method via calling the "Task-equivalent signature". This functionality is available in both sync and async methods.

### I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures

The list of relevant components is augmented to include sync vs. async method types. Async methods have some additions to normal signature compatibility.

> Async MethodDef entries implicitly create two member definitions: one explicit, primary definiton, and a second implicit, runtime-generated definition.

Reviewer: Can you comment on the impact to binary compatibility here? When the compiler generates a `.call`, what signature do we expect it to provide? Either?

Reviewer 7: I think the idea is that if you're in an `async2` context, you emit the `async2` signature to call (so that way you get optimised behaviour when the method is implemented with `async2`), otherwise the task based one. The runtime generates the one that was not provided.

Author: The precise idea is that you emit a call to _either_ signature, depending on what you need. So if you're in a (runtime) async method and want to await another async method, you emit a call to the "primary" signature. If you want to convert that method to a task, either because in source code there's no await, or because you're not in an async method, you call the "Task-equivalent" signature.

Reviewer 2: When an async2 method calls another async2 method directly it is roughly the same as calling a Task-equivalent signature and immediately `await`ing the result, just optimized to bypass the Task API. 
In theory such call can be inlined or tail-call optimized, or just performed much faster since Task does not stand in the way.

One reason to call Task-equivalent signature is if the caller actually wants to use Task APIs like `WaitAll`, `ContinueWith`.  
This is a plausible scenario for both ordinary and runtime-async callers.

For the ordinary methods the Task-based signature is the only one that they can call. A runtime async method can call either of the signatures. 
Direct call is the "magic" call that propagates the asynchrony, while call via Task API is the old boring call which will get you a Task.

> Can you comment on the impact to binary compatibility here? When the compiler generates a .call, what signature do we expect it to provide? Either?  

Presumably the preexisting `.call` was calling async-v1 method and expecting a Task result, thus it should continue calling the Task-based signature. 
Effectively the caller does not need to change at all if the calee is replaced with a runtime async equivalent.

Reviewer: Interesting, but this then raises another question for me: does this mean that it becomes a _binary breaking_ change to take an `async2` method and make it not actually `async`? IE, if I change it to just a `Task`-returning method, the compiler is no longer going to emit the "primary" async runtime signature; does that mean that an `async2` method in another binary that was calling it in the "primary" form breaks?

Reviewer: Talked with @agocke this morning: while the rules as written today may not adequately convey this, the intent is that the above scenario is _not_ a breaking change. I think it likely that the C# compiler will want to take the emit strategy of: if the runtime feature flag exists, always emit directly-awaited task-or-valuetask-returning methods in the new primary async signature form, _regardless_ of whether the compiler sees the new primary async signature in the reference or not. That way, if the reference updates (or if this is a complex multi-targeting scenario where the final implementation has the new signature, but the reference the compiler saw beforehand doesn't), things will seamlessly get faster, without having to go through multiple recompiles for an async signature change to propagate through the system.

Author: Addendum has been added to basically say that any sync method that would correspond to an async method also has an async definition. It's not particularly elegant, but ideally that will be cleaned up.

> The primary, mandatory definition must be present in metadata as a MethodDef. This signature must have a required custom modifier as the last custom modifier before the return type. The custom modifier must fit the following requirements:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The primary, mandatory definition must be present in metadata as a MethodDef. This signature is required to have a `modopt` (optional modifier) as the last custom modifier before the return type. The custom modifier must fit the following requirements:
```

* If the return type is void, the custom modifier must be either `System.Threading.Task` or `System.Threading.ValueTask`.
* If the return type is not `void`, the modifier must be to either `System.Threading.Task<T>` or `System.Threading.ValueTask<T>`. The return type must be a valid substitution for the type parameter of the custom modifier type.

_[Note: async methods have the same return type conventions as sync methods. If the async method produces a System.Int32, the return type must be System.Int32.]_

> The second async signature is implicit and runtime-generated and is hereafter referred to as the "Task-equivalent" signature. It is generated based on the primary signature. The transformation is as follows:

Author: That's a good question. I think that's correct, but I have to review the full ECMA-335 spec to make sure.

> The second async signature is implicit and runtime-generated and is hereafter referred to as the "Task-equivalent" signature. It is generated based on the primary signature. The transformation is as follows:

Author: OK, reviewed, you're correct. I don't have time right now to find every spot in the spec that would need to be adjusted here, but the intent is that basically the calling convention for implicit definitions of both sync and async methods would be to use `MethodRef` just like a `VARARG` call. I think every spot in the spec that mentions special casing for VARARG should be adjusted to also mention implicit definitions.

If the async return type is void, the return type of the Task-equivalent signature is the type of the async custom modifier.

> Otherwise, the Task-equivalent return type is the custom modifier type (either Task`1 or ValueTask`1), substituted with the async return type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise, the Task-equivalent return type is the custom modifier type (either ``Task`1`` or ``ValueTask`1``), substituted with the async return type.
```

### I.8.10.2 Method inheritance

For the purposes of inheritance and hiding, both async signatures ([### I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures]) are used for hiding and overriding, but cannot be configured separately.

### II.10.3.2 The .override directive

> Async methods participate in overrides through both definitions (both signatures). An async method with a .override overrides the target method signature, as well as the secondary "Task-equivalent" signature if applicable. An async method may also override only the "Task-equivalent" signature, if an async signature is not present on the base class. A sync method may not override an async method, even if it matches the async method's "Task-equivalent" definition.

Reviewer: > An async method may also override only the "Task-equivalent" signature, **if an async signature is not present on the base class.**

Emphasis mine; what do you mean by async signature here? I'd like some clarity on a couple of scenarios:

1. Library B depends on A. A has a virtual `Task`-returning method `M` that `B` overrides. `A` upgrades to a new version and, when `M` is recompiled, it implicitly gets upgraded, and now has the new `async` signature. Does `B`'s override of `M` continue to work without recompile?
2. Same as 1, except this time `B` is the one that is upgraded, not `A`. What signature does the compiler provide as a `.override` for `A.M`? The `Task`-equivalent one, or the new-style one?

Reviewer 7: I think async signature means the `async2` one. I think what it's saying is that you can't override an `async2` method with a task-based (current style) one.

This seems potentially problematic for compatibility of `virtual async` methods. Is it not possible for the runtime to generate `async` -> `async2` and/or vice versa helpers in this case?

Author: This is the ECMA-335 spec, so I want to remind everyone that `async` in C# does not exist. Async in this document always refers to "runtime async". All methods, including existing compiler-async, are "sync" methods from the runtime perspective.

> Library B depends on A. A has a virtual Task-returning method M that B overrides. A upgrades to a new version and, when M is recompiled, it implicitly gets upgraded, and now has the new async signature. Does B's override of M continue to work without recompile?

This is a great question. As written: this is a breaking change. Because a sync method can't override an async method, you cannot compatibly change a sync method to an async method.

I think that's wrong and probably an oversight on my part. We have to be able to do that for compatibility. I will need to write up rules on exactly what that entails.

> Async methods participate in overrides through both definitions (both signatures). An async method with a .override overrides the target method signature, as well as the secondary "Task-equivalent" signature if applicable. An async method may also override only the "Task-equivalent" signature, if an async signature is not present on the base class. A sync method may not override an async method, even if it matches the async method's "Task-equivalent" definition.

Reviewer 5: > A sync method may not override an async method, even if it matches the async method's "Task-equivalent" definition.

1.  What is a sync method in IL? (as opposed to an async1 method) How would you detect one?
2. I think this rule is saying that a nuget author can never start using async2 methods in their library until they're certain that every single downstream user has switched to async2.  Is this what we want?

Reviewer 2: > A sync method may not override an async method, even if it matches the async method's "Task-equivalent" definition.

I think that is allowed. At least that is desirable.

Basically in most cases you can replace an old Task-returning method with a runtime-async implementation whose Task-based signature matches what it replaces. 
You are replacing one entry point with two, one of which is exactly the same as before.

Take-back changes when a runtime async implementation is replaced with an ordinary Task-returning method could be binary-breaking though. You are replacing two entry points with one and something may already be using another entry. 
In many cases even take-back changes can be fixed via a recompile (i.e. not source-breaking).

Author: I put it in that we will also allow overriding async methods with sync methods. I'm not completely sure what to do about interface implementations. The problem is that sometimes they're implicit. For async methods it's easy to say that every declaration in metadata represents two definitions in the type system, but sync methods are harder. I think it would be worrying to imply that every existing Task method is going to get a corresponding shadow async declaration. But for interface methods we would have to somehow recognize that a given Task method is the Task-equivalent signature for an interface, and that it can implement a method on an interface.

This document is a draft of changes to ECMA-335 for the "runtime async" feature. When the feature is officially supported, it can be merged into the final ECMA-335 augments document.

# Runtime-async

Async is currently a feature implemented by various .NET languages as a compiler rewrite to support methods that can "yield" control back to their caller at specific "suspension" points. While effective, it's believed that implementation directly in the .NET runtime can provide improvements, especially in performance.

## Spec modifications

These are proposed modifications to the ECMA-335 specification for runtime-async.

### I.8.4.5 Sync and Async Methods

> Methods may be either 'sync' or 'async'. Async method definitions are methods with a return type of `System.Threading.Task`, `System.Threading.ValueTask`, `System.Threading.Task<T>`, or `System.Threading.ValueTask<T>`  attributed with `[System.Runtimee.CompilerServices.RuntimeAsyncMethodAttribute]`. Async method definitions are only valid inside async-capable assemblies. An async-capable assembly is one which references a corlib containing an `abstract sealed class RuntimeFeature` with a `public const string` field member named `Async`, or a corelib meeting these requirements. The `RuntimeAsyncMethodAttribute` should only be applied to methods, and may be defined in any assembly. Inside async method bodies, certain methods are also invokable by a special signature encoding, described in [### I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Methods may be either 'sync' or 'async'. Async method definitions are methods with a return type of `System.Threading.Task`, `System.Threading.ValueTask`, `System.Threading.Task<T>`, or `System.Threading.ValueTask<T>`  attributed with `[System.Runtime.CompilerServices.RuntimeAsyncMethodAttribute]`. Async method definitions are only valid inside async-capable assemblies. An async-capable assembly is one which references a corlib containing an `abstract sealed class RuntimeFeature` with a `public const string` field member named `Async`, or a corelib meeting these requirements. The `RuntimeAsyncMethodAttribute` should only be applied to methods, and may be defined in any assembly. Inside async method bodies, certain methods are also invokable by a special signature encoding, described in [### I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures].
```

> Methods may be either 'sync' or 'async'. Async method definitions are methods with a return type of `System.Threading.Task`, `System.Threading.ValueTask`, `System.Threading.Task<T>`, or `System.Threading.ValueTask<T>`  attributed with `[System.Runtimee.CompilerServices.RuntimeAsyncMethodAttribute]`. Async method definitions are only valid inside async-capable assemblies. An async-capable assembly is one which references a corlib containing an `abstract sealed class RuntimeFeature` with a `public const string` field member named `Async`, or a corelib meeting these requirements. The `RuntimeAsyncMethodAttribute` should only be applied to methods, and may be defined in any assembly. Inside async method bodies, certain methods are also invokable by a special signature encoding, described in [### I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures].

Reviewer 3: What's the point of allowing `RuntimeAsyncMethodAttribute` to be defined in any assembly when it is only going to work on runtime-async enabled runtime?

Also, I am thinking whether it would be worth it to burn a MethodImplOptions bit for this.

Reviewer 2: `MethodImplOptions` allows to save on metadata size if an attribute would be applicable frequently. But async methods are not very numerous. 

Are there other advantages that would be interesting here? 
Or just similarity with other things that are inputs to the JIT - like `AggressiveInlining`, `Synchronized`, .. ?

Reviewer 3: > Are there other advantages that would be interesting here?

Eliminating cost of the attribute lookup in various places.

Reviewer: > What's the point of allowing `RuntimeAsyncMethodAttribute` to be defined in any assembly when it is only going to work on runtime-async enabled runtime?

I asked Andy to document this because it will affect how Roslyn looks for the attribute, and some edge cases we will need to test. For our purposes, one of two things must be true:

* The attribute must be defined in the same assembly that defines `object` (practically, either System.Runtime.dll for the ref assembly, or System.Private.CoreLib for the runtime assembly), or
* The runtime must not care if the user defined their own copy of the attribute and Roslyn used it instead of the one defined in whatever assembly the "official" one lives in

Reviewer 2: So, is it going to be an attribute or a new `MethodImpl` entry? Did we settle on this?

Reviewer: I don't believe we settled on this, it should probably go in the open issues issue.

Reviewer 2: For now I assume it is going to be a `MethodImpl` with the next not taken value - 1024.

Reviewer 2: I've added an item to the design open issues. #109632

Reviewer 2: Also added an item for runtime async methods in structs.

Only local variables which are "hoisted" may be used across suspension points. That is, only "hoisted" local variables will have their state preserved after returning from a suspension. On methods with the `localsinit` flag set, non-"hoisted" local variables will be initialized to their default value when resuming from suspension. Otherwise, these variables will have an undefined value. To identify "hoisted" local variables, they must have an optional custom modifier to the `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.HoistedLocal` class, which will be a new .NET runtime API. This custom modifier must be the last custom modifier on the variable. It is invalid for by-ref variables, or variables with a by-ref-like type, to be marked hoisted. Hoisted local variables are stored in managed memory and cannot be converted to unmanaged pointers without explicit pinning.

Async methods have some temporary restrictions with may be lifted later:
* The `tail` prefix is forbidden
* Usage of the `localloc` instruction is forbidden

> * Pinning locals may not be created

Reviewer 3: I think we can just say that Pinning locals cannot be `HoistedLocal` instead, but otherwise allow it.

## Spec modifications

These are proposed modifications to the ECMA-335 specification for runtime-async.

### I.8.4.5 Sync and Async Methods

Methods may be either 'sync' or 'async'. Async methods have a special signature encoding, described in [### I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures].

Sync methods are all other methods.

Unlike sync methods, async methods support suspension. Suspension allows async methods to yield control flow back to their caller at certain well-defined suspension points, and resume execution of the remaining method at a later time or location, potentially on another thread.

Async methods support the following suspension points:

* Calling another async method. No special instructions need to be provided. If the callee suspends, the caller will suspend as well.
* Using new .NET runtime APIs to "await" an "INotifyCompletion" type. The signatures of these methods shall be:
  ```C#

>   // public static async2 Task AwaitAwaiterFromRuntimeAsync<TAwaiter>(TAwaiter awaiter) where TAwaiter : INotifyCompletion

Reviewer 11: async2?  will this temporary keyword for the prototype be part of our ecma spec?

Author: Temporary 😄 Long-term I think we can use “runtime async” and “compiler async”

Reviewer 12: ```csharp
await GetFinalSyntax("async2");
```

  public static void modreq([System.Runtime]System.Threading.Tasks.Task) AwaitAwaiterFromRuntimeAsync<TAwaiter>(TAwaiter awaiter) where TAwaiter : INotifyCompletion
  // public static async2 Task UnsafeAwaitAwaiterFromRuntimeAsync<TAwaiter>(TAwaiter awaiter) where TAwaiter : ICriticalNotifyCompletion
  public static void modreq([System.Runtime]System.Threading.Tasks.Task) UnsafeAwaitAwaiterFromRuntimeAsync<TAwaiter>(TAwaiter awaiter) where TAwaiter : ICriticalNotifyCompletion
  ```

Each of the above methods will have semantics analogous to the current AsyncTaskMethodBuilder.AwaitOnCompleted/AwaitUnsafeOnCompleted methods. After calling this method, in can be presumed that the task has completed.

> Only local variables which are "hoisted" may be used across suspension points. That is, only "hoisted" local variables will have their state preserved after returning from a suspension. On methods with the `localsinit` flag set, non-"hoisted" local variables will be initialized to their default value when resuming from suspension. Otherwise, these variables will have an undefined value. To identify "hoisted" local variables, they must have an optional custom modifier to the `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.HoistedLocal` class, which will be a new .NET runtime API. This custom modifier must be the last custom modifier on the variable. It is invalid for by-ref variables, or variables with a by-ref-like type, to be marked hoisted. Hoisted local variables are stored in managed memory and cannot be converted to unmanaged pointers without explicit pinning.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Only local variables which are "hoisted" may be used across suspension points. That is, only "hoisted" local variables will have their state preserved after returning from a suspension. On methods with the `localsinit` flag set, non-"hoisted" local variables will be initialized to their default value when resuming from suspension. Otherwise, these variables will have an undefined value. To identify "hoisted" local variables, they must have an optional custom modifier to the `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.HoistedLocal` class, which will be a new .NET runtime API. This custom modifier must be the last custom modifier on the variable. It is invalid for by-ref variables, or variables with a by-ref-like type, to be marked hoisted. Hoisted local variables are stored in managed memory and cannot be converted to unmanaged pointers without explicit pinning.
The code generator is free to ignore the `HoistedLocal` modifier if it can prove that this makes no observable difference in the execution of the generated program. This can be observable in diagnostics since it may mean the value of a local with the `HoistedLocal` modifier will not be available after certain suspension points.
```

> Only local variables which are "hoisted" may be used across suspension points. That is, only "hoisted" local variables will have their state preserved after returning from a suspension. On methods with the `localsinit` flag set, non-"hoisted" local variables will be initialized to their default value when resuming from suspension. Otherwise, these variables will have an undefined value. To identify "hoisted" local variables, they must have an optional custom modifier to the `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.HoistedLocal` class, which will be a new .NET runtime API. This custom modifier must be the last custom modifier on the variable. It is invalid for by-ref variables, or variables with a by-ref-like type, to be marked hoisted. Hoisted local variables are stored in managed memory and cannot be converted to unmanaged pointers without explicit pinning.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Only local variables which are "hoisted" may be used across suspension points. That is, only "hoisted" local variables will have their state preserved after returning from a suspension. Variables not marked as "hoisted" will have an undefined value after suspension points. To identify "hoisted" local variables, they must have an optional custom modifier to the `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.HoistedLocal` class, which will be a new .NET runtime API. This custom modifier must be the last custom modifier on the variable. It is invalid for by-ref variables, or variables with a by-ref-like type, to be marked hoisted. Hoisted local variables are stored in managed memory and cannot be converted to unmanaged pointers without explicit pinning.
```

The prototypes don't do anything like this today and I also don't see how an IL generator can benefit from this guarantee when it only applies after resumption, so I think there's no need to specify it.

Reviewer 3: We should have IL verification rules for this. I think this guarantee is useful for that.

Reviewer 4: What is the verification rule going to be? I do not see how this guarantee helps when the non-resuming case is specified as undefined.

Reviewer 3: The starting point would be the existing verification rules from ECLA-335:

> Verification assumes that the CLI zeroes all memory other than the evaluation stack before it is made visible to programs. A conforming implementation of the CLI shall provide this observable behavior. Furthermore, verifiable methods shall have the localsinit bit set, see Partition II (Flags for Method Headers).

We can work on evolving these rules. 

We have tried to ignore describing the rules for verifiable (ie type and memory safe) IL for a while as we have evolved .NET. We have learned the hard way recently that it might have been a mistake. We do not have clarity about the compiler/runtime contract that we once had, and it leads to confusion.

Reviewer 4: Moving towards a verification rule like "locals not marked hoisted will either have their value from before the suspension point or zero" does not seem very satisfying to me. Requiring the code generators to zero these locals always is possible, but of course comes with extra complexity (and extra bloat after every suspension point in unoptimized codegen). And sadly validating that the values of unhoisted locals are unused across suspension points would be quite an involved verification rule since it requires computing liveness.

As I have expressed before my opinion here is that we should drop the `HoistedLocal` annotation entirely. Then there is no concept of "unhoisted local used across a suspension point", and the use just naturally retains its (potentially zero initialized) value from before the suspension point.

Reviewer 4: OTOH, if we want to do verification that involves byrefs I'm not sure we can avoid the "the verifier needs to compute liveness" problem in any case...

Reviewer 2: I also think explicit `HoistedLocal` is unnecessary concept. JIT will have to infer what is hoisted from usage anyways and will have to reject invalid use anyways - regardless of decoration.  

NOTE: I completely agree with Jan on making the set of rules that is machine-verifiable. I just do not think `HoistedLocal` would help.

I think it will work better if we specify what use of locals are illegal. 

Ideally the rules could be enforced by a reasonably straight-forward analyzer (i.e. ILVerifier). In some cases we may want to be a bit more conservative than we could. 

Being able to do the correctness analysis in one pass would be ideal (if possible). Conversely - if the rules would ask for complex analysis (i.e. iterating to a fixed point), we should ask if what the scenario enables really worth it. 

While JIT could do complex analysis, it should not drive the rules here. The capability of JITs/interpreters with different levels of optimizations or as new features added or with different levels of optimizations.

Reviewer 2: I also think explicit `HoistedLocal` is unnecessary concept. JIT will have to infer what is hoisted from usage anyways and will have to reject invalid use anyways - regardless of decoration.  

NOTE: I completely agree with Jan on making the set of rules that is machine-verifiable. I just do not think `HoistedLocal` would help.

I think it will work better if we specify what use of locals are illegal. 

Ideally the rules could be enforced by a reasonably straight-forward analyzer (i.e. ILVerifier). In some cases we may want to be a bit more conservative than we could. While JIT could do complex analysis, it should not drive the rules here. The capability of JITs/interpreters with different levels of optimizations or as new features added or with different levels of optimizations.

Being able to do the correctness analysis in one pass would be ideal (if possible). 
Conversely - if the rules would ask for complex analysis (i.e. iterating to a fixed point), we should ask if what the scenario enables really worth it. 

Also note that the rules will indirectly inform the rules of high-level languages and we do not want those to be too complex either. C# users should not do liveness analysis in their head. Current async rules do not require that from the user. 
(even though C# compiler does liveness analysis for the purpose of optimal IL generation, it is an internal detail that changed a lot over time - i.e. was completely redone and became more prcesise in Roslyn 1.0)

Author: Let's be clear on what motivated my addition of `HoistedLocal` -- making it easier to get the same results as the current C# compiler lowering in the runtime implementation, particularly for interpreters.

I have not heard a lot of discussion on how interpreters should handle the case without HoistedLocal. Let's focus on that.

Reviewer 4: What we need is an overapproximation of the live state at each suspension point. The HoistedLocal mechanism is one such overapproximation, but there are other ones:
1. Just considering all locals live is clearly an overapproximation, and a very simple one. This is what the prototype currently does in tier 0.
1. Live variable analysis provides a much better estimate than the HoistedLocal mechanism since it does not conflate multiple suspension points into one. I do not think it is prohibitively expensive to compute, even for tier 0.
1. If we are scared about super-linearity of live variable analysis then it is possible to approximate liveness by linearizing the CFG, similarly to how linear scan register allocation works.

In my experience the expensive part of (2) is actually looking at the IR, not the super-linear part of computing the liveness sets after. (3) would incur that cost too. (1) and HoistedLocals does not incur this cost of looking at the IR.

Reviewer 2: The other way looking at this - If nearly everything will ignore the decorations, it makes sense for an IL generator to just put `HoistedLocal` on every local that allows it. 
Also for the most accurate description of what is hoistable, besides locals the set might need to include the parameters and `this`. 

I think we can keep `HoistedLocal` as something that we could do, if there is a scenario that can't live without it, but I have doubts so far.

Author: So what I'm hearing is that `HoistedLocal` goes too far, but there seems like there's still rules we need to specify.

In particular, does the stack need to be empty before an async call (aside from arguments)?

The code generator is free to ignore the `HoistedLocal` modifier if it can prove that this makes no observable difference in the execution of the generated program. This can be observable in diagnostics since it may mean the value of a local with the `HoistedLocal` modifier will not be available after certain suspension points.

Async methods have some temporary restrictions with may be lifted later:
* The `tail` prefix is forbidden
* Usage of the `localloc` instruction is forbidden
* Pinning locals may not be marked `HoistedLocal`

Other restrictions are likely to be permanent.

Suspension points may not appear in exception handling blocks.

All async methods effectively have two entry points, or signatures. The first signature is the one present in the above code: a modreq before the return type. The second signature is a "Task-equivalent signature", described in further detail in [I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures].

> Async methods have a special calling convention and may not be called directly outside of other async methods. To call an async method from a sync method, callers must use the second "Task-equivalent signature".

Reviewer 13: This sounds like it would impact aspect of Ref.Emit and invoke. Has Ref.Emit been considered with respect to async2 methods?

Author: We haven't gone into `Ref.Emit` yet. It currently seems likely that you could not directly invoke an async method through the async calling convention as there is no way to access the "unwrapping" signature from the `Ref.Emit` API surface. You could get a Task back, though.

Callers may retrieve a Task-equivalent return type from an async method via calling the "Task-equivalent signature". This functionality is available in both sync and async methods.

### I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures

The list of relevant components is augmented to include sync vs. async method types. Async methods have some additions to normal signature compatibility.

Async MethodDef entries implicitly create two member definitions: one explicit, primary definiton, and a second implicit, runtime-generated definition.

> The primary, mandatory definition must be present in metadata as a MethodDef. This signature is required to have a `modopt` (optional modifier) as the last custom modifier before the return type. The custom modifier must fit the following requirements:

Reviewer 10: >`modopt` (optional modifier) [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=115&length=28)

I got confused between modopt (mentioned here) and modreq (mentioned above, such as line 45). A modreq seems more appropriate as compilers that don't understand this metadata should not attempt to invoke those methods.

* If the return type is void, the custom modifier must be either `System.Threading.Task` or `System.Threading.ValueTask`.
* If the return type is not `void`, the modifier must be to either `System.Threading.Task<T>` or `System.Threading.ValueTask<T>`. The return type must be a valid substitution for the type parameter of the custom modifier type.

_[Note: async methods have the same return type conventions as sync methods. If the async method produces a System.Int32, the return type must be System.Int32.]_

The second async signature is implicit and runtime-generated and is hereafter referred to as the "Task-equivalent" signature. It is generated based on the primary signature. The transformation is as follows:
* If the async return type is void, the return type of the Task-equivalent signature is the type of the async custom modifier.

> * Otherwise, the Task-equivalent return type is the custom modifier type (either ``Task`1`` or ``ValueTask`1``), substituted with the async return type.

Reviewer 10: It sounds like [custom task-like types](https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn/blob/main/docs/features/task-types.md) are out of luck. Can we make that explicit? Is that in the maybe or likely-never category?

Author: Added, although I think this is also specified above as the list of valid custom-modifiers is spelled out precisely.

* Suspension points may not appear in exception handling blocks.
* Only four types will be supported as the return type for "runtime-async" methods: `System.Threading.Task`, `System.Threading.ValueTask`, `System.Threading.Task<T>`, and `System.Threading.ValueTask<T>`

All async methods effectively have two entry points, or signatures. The first signature is the one present in the above code: a `Task` or `ValueTask` returning method. The second signature is a "secondary signature", described in further detail in [I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures].

Callers may retrieve a Task-equivalent return type from an async method via calling the "Task-equivalent signature". This functionality is available in both sync and async methods.

### I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures

The list of relevant components is augmented to include sync vs. async method types. Async methods have some additions to normal signature compatibility.

> Async methods are capable of calling certain methods using an "async signature." The target method must return one of `Task`, `ValueTask`, `Task<T>`, or `ValueTask<T>`.

Reviewer 2: Like:   "Runtime async methods are capable of calling other runtime async methods using "unwrapped signature"...

The semantic of such call is roughly the same as "awaiting" a call via the primary signature.

Note: calls via "unwrapped signature" form ordinary, not runtime async, methods are not allowed.

> Async methods are capable of calling certain methods using an "async signature." The target method must return one of `Task`, `ValueTask`, `Task<T>`, or `ValueTask<T>`.

Reviewer 2: This implies that changing from runtime async to ordinary async, and the other way, is not a binary breaking change.

At least - this is the idea, ignoring the subtleties in semantics related to exec/sync contexts, if such exist.

> Async methods are capable of calling certain methods using an "async signature." The target method must return one of `Task`, `ValueTask`, `Task<T>`, or `ValueTask<T>`.

Reviewer 2: Call via unwrapped signature now feels like encoding "await" at IL level without introducing an actual `await` IL opcode.

> Async methods are capable of calling certain methods using an "async signature." The target method must return one of `Task`, `ValueTask`, `Task<T>`, or `ValueTask<T>`.

Reviewer: > This implies that changing from runtime async to ordinary async, and the other way, is not a binary breaking change.
> 
> At least - this is the idea, ignoring the subtleties in semantics related to exec/sync contexts, if such exist.

> Call via unwrapped signature now feels like encoding "await" at IL level without introducing an actual `await` IL opcode.

Agreed with both of these points. That's explicitly how I've been viewing this new version of the proposal.

> Async methods are capable of calling certain methods using an "async signature." The target method must return one of `Task`, `ValueTask`, `Task<T>`, or `ValueTask<T>`.

Author: Yup. I like the "unwrapping" terminology. I added that to the spec.

It is an error to declare a method with an "async signature".

_[Note: these rules operate before generic substitution, meaning that a method which only meets requirements after substitution would not be considered as valid.]_

### I.8.10.2 Method inheritance

For the purposes of inheritance and hiding, both async signatures ([### I.8.6.1.5 Method signatures]) are used for hiding and overriding, but cannot be configured separately.

### II.10.3.2 The .override directive

Async methods participate in overrides through both definitions (both signatures). An async method with a .override overrides the target method signature, as well as the secondary "Task-equivalent" signature if applicable. An async method may also override a sync method matching the "Task-equivalent" signature, if an async signature is not present on the base class. A sync method may also override an async method's "Task-equivalent" signature. This will behave as though both the async and "Task-equivalent" methods have been overridden.

> 

Reviewer 2: I like that a bunch of text got removed. Fewer rules and cases that need to be described a good sign for a spec.
